#  **Balancing Rotor Systems (Chen et al. 1991)**

Large steam turbine generators, high speed gas turbine engines, and other machinery with flexible rotating shafts must be balanced to reduce vibration. Minimizing vibration is important in extending the life of the machine, improving operating efficiency, and maintaining a safe operating environment. The design and fabrication of rotating machinery has undergone evolutionary changes over time, in particular being influenced by increased energy costs and safety and maintenance concerns. The use of lighter weight materials in rotors and faster rotating speeds necessitates more accurate manufacturing processes, which result in improved balancing characteristics in the rotors.<br>
One of the most popular techniques for flexible rotor balancing treats the rotordynamic system as a linear system in calculating balance correction weights. The primary disadvantage of this approach is that it typically requires a large number of actual trial runs to collect enough data to estimate accurately the required balance corrections. The linear programming approach seems attractive from a computational standpoint, but in many applications, such as for utility companies, the costs of shutdown, installation of trial weights, startup, and data collection are prohibitive.<br>
Using a recently developed nonlinear programming model, it is now possible to determine an optimal system balance without the necessity of trial runs. In place of *actual* trial runs, this new technique requires developing a mathematical model of the system dynamics that can be used to *simulate* rotor response to balance corrections.<br>
The unbalance of a rotor is continuously distributed along the axis of the rotor. However, in the nonlinear model, this continuous distribution is discretized into a finite number of balance planes to which corrections can be applied. Similarly, measurements are taken at only a limited number of points (in some cases, as few as two points is sufficient). The nonlinear optimization process then seeks to find the *unbalance vector* that minimizes a least-squares difference between the adjusted analytical model and the measured experimental model. In the nonlinear solver for this constrained least-squares problem, a search direction is found using a steepest descent method, and a constrained line search is used to determine the step size. Gradients of the objective function, with respect to all the design variables, determine the search direction; and at each gradient evaluation, the rotor model must be solved to obtain the system response. The computations are frequently complicated by ill-conditioned gradients, but normalization procedures are employed effectively against this difficulty. Because the rotor systems being balanced often have multiple possible operating speeds, the optimization objective function includes weights (coefficients) associated with each different operating speed of the rotor, with the largest weights applied to the most critical operating speeds.<br>
In test rigs, significant improvements in vibration levels were observed through the use of this model. And in the numerical computations, convergence to an optimum solution took place in less than a minute of mainframe processing time.<br>