#  **Illustrative Applications**

## **Gasoline Blending Systems (Rigby et al. 1995)**

Texaco’s most important refinery product is gasoline. Crude oil entering a refinery is distilled and split into various components, which can then be reformed or cracked into lighter compounds that may be of greater commercial value. The resulting stocks (having varied and unanticipated properties) must then be blended to achieve certain quality specifications. The greatest profitability will result if the refinery can maximize its production of higher octane gasoline blends from the available stocks.<br>
Gasoline blend qualities include familiar properties such as octane (measured as research, motor, and road octanes) and lead content, but also other characteristics such as Reid vapor pressure (RVP), sulfur and aromatic contents, and volatilities (the temperatures at which certain percentages of the blend boil away). Other qualities are important because of federal and state agency emission standards. While some properties of gasoline blending can be (and have been for decades) modeled as *linear* optimization problems, it is known that octane, RVP, and volatilities are highly nonlinear functions of volume and weight.<br>
Prior to the late 1970s, gasoline blending was a simple mixture of various stocks, and octane requirements were met by injecting tetraethyl lead into the blend. Blending recipes were based on hand calculations that did not significantly affect the overall economies of the plant. Tetraethyl lead was inexpensive and available in ample supplies, so the octane requirement was not a binding constraint in the model.<br>
However, during the 1970s, governments mandated that lead be phased out of the blending recipe; and by the early 1980s, the federal government also clamped down on volatility specifications for gasoline. These two changes had a drastic effect on the economics of refining, and Texaco responded by developing a nonlinear gasoline blending optimization system. The first version of the system resulted in an estimated annual savings of \$30 million, improved quality control, and increased the ability to plan refining operations and market the products, and perform sensitivity analysis on current operations schedules.<br>
The blending model was coded in the GAMS modeling language, and uses MINOS solvers. Subsequent versions of the system allowed dditional flexibility in handling blending stocks, increased the number of constraints that could be modeled, and permitted computations to be placed on more sophisticated client server network hardware.<br>
The system is used for both immediate, short-range, and long-range planning. Refinery planners make use of the system to generate the recipe for the next blending operation. For short-term planning purposes, it is important to be able to examine the multi-period model covering the next few days, to ensure that components consumed in today’s blends do not render tomorrow’s schedule infeasible. And finally, refinery operations planners must anticipate all the activities associated with gearing up plants for gasoline reformulation. Estimates produced by older linear programming planning models must be checked for consistency with larger nonlinear models, and the system allows planners to identify errors and restructure problem formulations where necessary.
